IV

CORRESPONDENCE WITH KING DAVID'S LODGE, NO. 1, RHODE ISLAND, AUGUST,
1790.


The next correspondence in chronological order is the letter, sent in
reply to the Address delivered by the Brethren of King David's Lodge,
No. 1, at Newport, Rhode Island, to President WASHINGTON, August 17,
1790, during his visit to New England.

By referring to the Minutes of this old Lodge following entry is found:

     "At a Lodge, called by request of several Breth-
     "ren on Tuesday evening, August 17, 5790, an
     "Entered Apprentice Lodge being opened in due
     "form proceeded to business, when it was proposed
     "to address the President of the United States.
     "The R. W. Master (Moses Seixas) Henry Sher-
     "burne, and the Secretary, [William Littlefield]
     "were appointed a committee for that purpose,
     "after which the Lodge closed."[27]


Following address was prepared and according to local tradition was
publicly presented, by the Committee to President WASHINGTON, in the
Venerable Sanctuary of the Jewish Congregation at Newport; the Brethren
of King David's Lodge being present:

     "TO GEORGE WASHINGTON, _President of the United
                                 States of America._

     "We the Master, Wardens, and Brethren of
     "King David's Lodge in New Port Rhode Island
     "with joyful hearts embrace this opportunity to
     "greet you as a Brother, and to hail you welcome
     "to Rhode Island. We exult in the thought that
     "as Masonry has always been patronised by the
     "wise, the good, and the great, so that it stood
     "and ever will stand, as its fixtures are on the
     "immutable pillars of faith, hope, and charity.

     "With unspeakable pleasure we gratulate
     "you as filling the presidential chair with the
     "applause of a numerous and enlightened people
     "Whilst at the same time we felicitate ourselves
     "in the honor done the brotherhood by your many
     "exemplary virtues and emanations of goodness
     "proceeding from a heart worthy of possessing
     "the ancient mysteries of our craft; being persuaded
     "that the wisdom and grace with which heaven
     "has endowed you, will square all your thoughts,
     "words, and actions by the eternal laws of honor,
     "equity, and truth, so as to promote the advancement
     "of all good works, your own happiness, and that
     "of mankind.

     "Permit us then, illustrious Brother,
     "cordially to salute you with three times three
     "and to add our fervent supplications that the
     "sovereign architect of the universe may always
     "encompass you with his holy protection.

                 "MOSES SEIXAS[28]   _Master_
     "New Port Augt 17, 1790.      _Committee_.
                 "HY SHERBURNE
     "By order
       "WM LITTLEFIELD, _Secy._"


Brother Moses Seixas was born in New York, March 28, 1744; died in New
York City, November 29, 1809. He was a merchant in Newport, Rhode
Island, and one of the founders of the Newport Bank of Rhode Island, of
which he was cashier until his death. He succeeded Brother Moses M. Hays
as Worshipful Master of King David's Lodge at Newport. He was also the
first Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Rhode Island. It was Moses
Seixas who addressed a letter of welcome in the name of the Jewish
congregation to GEORGE WASHINGTON when the latter visited Newport, and
it was to him that WASHINGTON's answer was addressed.

The Town Hall at Newport being out of repair at that time the ancient
Jewish Synagogue on the main street was used, upon that and several
other public occasions. It is an interesting fact that this sacred
edifice is still preserved in the same condition as it was during the
Colonial period.

So far as known this address was the first of Masonic import made to
WASHINGTON as President. Unfortunately, the exact date of presentation
and receipt of his answer is not known to a certainty, as there does not
appear to be any date upon either the original documents or the copies
in WASHINGTON's letter book.

The original address and WASHINGTON's reply to the Master, Wardens and
Brethren of King David's Lodge in Newport, the latter signed in
autograph by WASHINGTON, are in the Athenæum collection at Boston,
Massachusetts.[29]

Following copy of the President's answer is taken from his letter
book.[30] Both address and answer in the letter book are in the
handwriting of Major William Jackson, secretary to the President.

A photostat of the original entry is in the Archives of the Grand
Lodge of Pennsylvania. It will be noted that there is neither place nor
date given.


=FAC-SIMILE OF REPLY TO KING DAVID'S LODGE, NO. 1, NEWPORT, R. I. LETTER
BOOK II, FOLIO 29.=


President WASHINGTON arrived at Newport, R.I., at eight o'clock on
Tuesday morning, August 17, 1790. On the next day, Wednesday, the
President and his suite left on the Packet "Hancock" at nine o'clock in
the morning for Providence.

His company consisted of Governor Clinton of New York, Thomas Jefferson,
Secretary of State, Senator Theodore Foster, Judge Blair, Mr. Smith of
South Carolina and Mr. Gorman of New Hampshire; members of Congress.[31]

WASHINGTON left Providence, Saturday, August 21, and arrived in New York
upon the following day, Sunday, August 22, 1790,[32] and sent the
following reply to the Newport Brethren:

     "TO THE MASTER, WARDENS, AND BRETHREN OF
     "KING DAVIDS LODGE IN NEWPORT RHODE ISLAND."

     "_Gentlemen_,

     "I receive the welcome which you
     "give me to Rhode Island with pleasure, and I
     "acknowledge my obligations for the flattering
     "expressions of regard, contained in your address,
     "with grateful sincerity.

     "Being persuaded that a just
     "application of the principles, on which the Masonic
     "Fraternity is founded, must be promotive of
     "private virtue and public prosperity, I shall
     "always be happy to advance the interests of
     "the Society, and to be considered by them as
     "a deserving brother.

     "My best wishes, Gentlemen,
     "are offered for your individual happiness."[33]

        "Go. Washington"


=FAC-SIMILE OF NOTICE SENT TO BROTHER WASHINGTON AT MOUNT VERNON TO
ATTEND HIS LODGE. TREASURED BY THE WIFE OF PRESIDENT MADISON UNTIL HER
DEATH. ORIGINAL IN ARCHIVES OF GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA. MSS. VOL. A,
FOLIO 81.=



Footnotes:

[27] A copy of the Extracts from the Records of King David's Lodge, No.
1, as made by Ara Hildreth, Esq., is in the Archives of the Grand Lodge
of Pennsylvania, Mss. Volume Q, R.I. 7.

Cf. also a verified copy of the Minute in "Proceedings of the
Anti-Masonic Republican Convention of Massachusetts, Boston, 1832," p.
22.

[28] _Vide_ "The Jews and Masonry in the United States," by Samuel
Oppenheim, New York, 1810, p. 22 _et seq._

[29] Cf. "Catalogue of the Washington Collection in the Boston
Athenæum," Boston, 1897, p. 331.

[30] Letterbook II, p. 29.

[31] Cf. "Washington after the Revolution," W. S. Baker, Philadelphia,
1898, p. 192.

[32] Cf. _Pennsylvania Packet_, August 30-31 1790.

[33] Copy of Address in Letter Book II, pp. 27-28, Photostat of same in
Archives of Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.