V

CORRESPONDENCE WITH ST. JOHN'S LODGE, NO. 2 AT NEWBERN, N. C., APRIL,
1791.


The next Masonic letter of President WASHINGTON was written, in answer
to an address by the brethren of St. John's Lodge, No. 2, at Newbern,
North Carolina, during his southern tour in 1791.

April 7, 1791, WASHINGTON started on a tour through the Southern States,
by way of Fredericksburg, Richmond, and Petersburg, Virginia; Halifax,
Tarborough, Newbern, and Wilmington, North Carolina; Georgetown, and
Charleston, South Carolina; and Savannah, Georgia.

When advice of this proposed presidential visit reached Newbern, the
brethren of St. John's Lodge, No. 2,[34] at the stated meeting held on
April 1, 1791, passed the following resolution. "_Resolved_, that an
address shall be presented to Brother GEORGE WASHINGTON, in behalf of
this Lodge, on his arriving in this town."[35]

Upon his arrival at Newbern, N. C., April 20, following address was
presented to the President,[36] which, together with the reply, has thus
far never been in print or noted:

     "TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
         AMERICA.

     "The Address of St Johns Lodge No. 2 of
         Newbern.

     "_Right Worshipful Sir_,

     "We the Master, Officers, and Members of St.
     "Johns Lodge No 2, of Newbern, beg leave to hail
     "you welcome with three times three.

     "We approach you not with the language of
     "adulation, but sincere fraternal affection--your
     "works having proved you to be the true and faith-
     "ful brother, the skilful and expert Craftsman, the
     "just and upright man, But the powers of elo-
     "quence are too feeble to express with sufficient
     "energy the cordial warmth with which our bosoms
     "glow toward you.

     "We therefore most ardently wish, most fervently
     "and devoutly pray, That the Providence of the
     "most high may strengthen, establish, and protect
     "you, in your walk through this life; and when you
     "shall be called off from your terrestrial labours by
     "command of our divine grand master, and your
     "operations sealed with the mark of his approbation,
     "may your soul be eternally refreshed with the
     "streams of living water which flow at the right
     "hand of God, and when the supreme architect of
     "all worlds shall collect his most precious jewels as
     "ornaments of the celestial Jerusalem, may you
     "everlastingly shine among those of the brightest
     "lustre.

     "We are in our own behalf, and that of the
     "Members of this Lodge,

        "Right worshipful Sir;
     "St Johns Lodge No. 2.
        "Your true and faithful brethren
     "April 20th 5791.
        "ISAAC GUION _Master_.
        "SAMUEL CHAPMAN _Senior Warden_.
        "WILLIAM JOHNSTON, _Junior Warden_.
     "SOLOMON HALLING, EDW. PASTEUR, JAS CARNEY,
        "F. LOWTHROP.
             "_Members of the Committee_."


=FAC-SIMILE OF ADDRESS FROM ST. JOHN'S LODGE, NO. 2, NEWBERN, N. C.
LETTER BOOK II, FOLIO 47-48.=


Brothers: Isaac Guion, Worshipful Master, Samuel Chapman, Senior Warden,
William Johnston, Junior Warden, and Solomon Halling, signers to above
petition had all seen service in the Continental Army during the
Revolutionary War. Brother Guion served as Surgeon and Paymaster;
Brother Chapman, Captain in 8th North Carolina, serving until the close
of the War; Brother Johnston, Captain in North Carolina Militia and
present at Kings Mountain.

Brother Hailing was Surgeon of the 4th Carolina Regiment and served
until the close of the War.

     WASHINGTON'S REPLY[37] TO THE BRETHREN OF ST. JOHN'S LODGE.

     "TO THE MASTER, WARDENS, AND MEMBERS OF ST
         "JOHN'S LODGE NO. 2 OF NEWBERN.

     "_Gentlemen_,

     "I receive the cordial welcome which you
     "are pleased to give me with sincere gratitude.

     "My best ambition having ever aimed at
     "the unbiassed approbation of my fellow-citizens,
     "it is peculiarly pleasing to find my conduct
     "so affectionately approved by a fraternity whose as-
     "sociation is founded in justice and benevolence.

     "In reciprocating the wishes contained
     "in your address, be persuaded that I offer a sincere
     "prayer for your present and future happiness.

        "Go. Washington"


"At the following Meeting of St. John's Lodge, No. 2, April 29, 1791,
the Master laid before the Lodge the answer of Brother George Washington
ordered that it be read, which being done, Resolved that it be entered
on Minutes of this Lodge."[38] "The Address to Brother Washington and
his answer are both on the Minutes of the Lodge. The original letter may
have been lost during the late unpleasantness, as the Lodge lost nearly
everything it possessed."[39]



Footnotes:

[34] In the latter part of the eighteenth century, St. John's Lodge, No.
2, at Newbern, was very active, at which time it built a two-story
theatre and Masonic Hall, and took part in a number of local matters.

[35] Extract from Minutes by Brother J. F. Rhem, M.D., Newbern, N. C.

[36] Letter Book 2, pp. 47-48 in Library of Congress, Washington, D. C.;
photostat in Archives of Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

[37] _Ibid._, p. 49; photostat in Archives of Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania.

[38] Extract from Minutes by Brother J. F. Rhem, M.D., Newbern, N. C.

[39] Brother J. F. Rhem, Newbern, N. C., in letter to Brother A. B.
Andrews, Jr., December 14, 1914.