
IX

CORRESPONDENCE WITH GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA, JANUARY 3, 1792.


During the Presidential term of Brother WASHINGTON, the President, when
in Philadelphia, lived in a large double three-story brick mansion, on
the south side of Market Street, sixty feet east of Sixth Street, the
site of which is now occupied by three stores, viz.: Nos. 526, 528, 530.

The Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania then held its meetings in the upper
floor of the Meeting house of the Free Quakers, still standing, at the
southwest corner of Arch and Fifth Streets; this was but a short
distance from the presidential mansion. Brother WASHINGTON was
undoubtedly personally acquainted with many of its members, especially
such as had been officers during the Revolution, and were fellow members
of the Cincinnati.

On St. John's Day, December 27, 1791, a Grand Lodge was opened in ample
form,[49] and the Minutes of the last Grand Communication were read, as
far as concerns the election of Grand Officers.

The Grand Officers upon this occasion were:

Brother Jonathan Bayard Smith, _R. W. Grand Master_.

Brother Joseph Few, _Deputy Grand Master_.

Brother Thomas Procter, _Senior Grand Warden_.

Brother Gavin Hamilton, _Junior Grand Warden_.

Brother Peter Le Barbier Duplessis, _Grand Secretary_.

Brother Benjamin Mason, _Grand Treasurer_.

The Rev. Brother Dr. William Smith then addressed the Brethren in an
oration suitable to the Grand Day, and the thanks of the Lodge were
given to said Brother William Smith for the same.

After which, on motion and seconded, the Rev. Brother Dr. Smith and the
Right Worshipful Grand Officers were appointed a Committee to prepare an
address to our Illustrious Brother GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the
United States; and this Lodge was adjourned to the second day of January
next to receive the report of said Committee.

     "PHILADELPHIA, January 2d, 1792.

     "_Grand Lodge, By Adjournment_,[50]

     "A Grand Lodge was opened in ample form, and the Minutes of St.
     John's Day being read as far as relates to the appointment of a
     Committee to prepare an Address to our illustrious Brother George
     Washington, The Revd. Bro. Dr. Wm. Smith, one of the said
     Committee, presented the Draft of one which was read, Whereupon, on
     Motion and Seconded, the same was unanimously approved of, and
     Resolved, That the Rt. Wt. Grand Master, Depy. G. Master, and
     Grand Officers, with the Revd Bro. Smith, be a Committee to
     present the said Address in behalf of this Rt. Wt. Grand Lodge,
     signed by the Right Worshipful Grand Master, and Countersigned by
     the Grand Secretary.

     "Lodge closed at half past 9 o'clock in Harmony."


Following is the address presented to Brother WASHINGTON. Both the
original draft in the handwriting of Brother William Smith, showing
minor alterations, as well as a fair copy, are in the archives of the
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.[51]

     "TO HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

     "_Sir and Brother_:

     "The Ancient _York Masons_ of the Jurisdiction of Pennsylvania, for
     the first time assembled in General _Communication_ to celebrate
     the Feast of St. John the Evangelist, since your Election to the
     _Chair_ of Government in the United States, beg leave to approach
     you with Congratulations from the East, and in the pride of
     Fraternal affection to hail you as the _Great Master Builder_
     (under the Supreme Architect) by whose labours the _Temple of
     Liberty_ hath been reared in the West, exhibiting to the Nations of
     the Earth a _Model_ of _Beauty_, _Order_ and _Harmony_ worthy of
     their Imitation and Praise.

     "Your Knowledge of the Origin and Objects of our Institution; its
     Tendency to promote the Social Affections and harmonize the Heart,
     give us a sure pledge that this tribute of our Veneration, this
     Effusion of our Love will not be ungrateful to you; nor will Heaven
     reject our _Prayer_ that you may be long continued to adorn the
     bright list of Master workmen which our Fraternity in the
     _terrestrial Lodge_; and that you may be late removed to that
     _Celestial Lodge_ where love and Harmony reign transcendent and
     Divine; where the great Architect more immediately presides, and
     where _Cherubim_ and _Seraphim_, wafting our Congratulations from
     _Earth to Heaven_, shall hail you _Brother_.

        (Seal)     "By order and in behalf of the Grand
                   "Lodge of Pennsylvania in general Com-
                   "munication assembled in ample form.


                   "J B Smith

        (Signed)                G.M.

                  [Illegible Signature]

       "Attest:                 Gd. Secry."


=FAC-SIMILE OF THE ORIGINAL ADDRESS READ BEFORE PRESIDENT WASHINGTON
BY REV. BRO. WILLIAM SMITH, D.D., JANUARY 3, 1792.

ORIGINAL IN ARCHIVES OF GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA. MSS.--VOLUME
A.--FOLIO.--21.=


On January 3, 1792, Jonathan Bayard Smith, the Right Worshipful Grand
Master, together with the Grand Officers and Rev. Brother William Smith
called on the President and delivered the above address.

The deputation was received in the dining room of the presidential
mansion. This was a room about thirty feet long, and where WASHINGTON
was accustomed to receive delegations.

At the Quarterly Communication held March 5, 1792, the Right Worshipful
Grand Master Jonathan B. Smith informed the Brethren that, in conformity
to the resolve of this Grand Lodge, he had, in company with the Grand
Officers and the Rev. Brother Dr. Smith, presented the address to our
illustrious Brother GEORGE WASHINGTON and had received an answer, which
was read.

     "TO THE ANCIENT YORK MASONS OF THE
       "JURISDICTION OF PENNSYLVANIA.

     "_Gentlemen and Brothers_,

     "I receive your kind Congratulations
     "with the purest sensations of fraternal affection:--and
     "from a heart deeply impressed with your generous
     "wishes for my present and future happiness, I beg
     "you to accept my thanks.

     "At the same time I request you will
     "be assured of my best wishes and earnest prayers
     "for your happiness while you remain in this terres-
     "tial Mansion, and that we may thereafter meet
     "as brethren in the Eternal Temple of the
     "Supreme Architect.

        "Go. Washington"


=FAC-SIMILE OF WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO GRAND LODGE OF PENNSYLVANIA,
JANUARY, 1792. ORIGINAL IN ARCHIVES OF THE GRAND LODGE.=


=WASHINGTON'S MASONIC APRON.

EMBROIDERED BY MADAM LAFAYETTE; PRESENTED AUGUST, 1784, BY BRO. GEN.
LAFAYETTE TO BRO. GEN. WASHINGTON; PRESENTED OCTOBER 26, 1816, BY THE
LEGATEES OF BRO. WASHINGTON TO THE WASHINGTON BENEVOLENT SOCIETY OF
PENNSYLVANIA; PRESENTED JULY 3, 1829, BY THE WASHINGTON BENEVOLENT
SOCIETY TO THE R. W. GRAND LODGE, F. &. A. M. OF PENNSYLVANIA.

ORIGINAL APRON IN MUSEUM OF THE GRAND LODGE.=


Whereupon, on motion and seconded, Resolved, unanimously, that the said
address and the answer thereto, shall be entered on the minutes.

This answer, in possession of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, is in the
handwriting of Tobias Lear, who was the private secretary of the
President, and for years attended to the details of WASHINGTON's
domestic affairs, and was liberally remembered by him in his will.

The letter was signed by WASHINGTON, who had both the address and answer
copied verbatim in one of his letter books[52] by Bartholomew Dandridge,
secretary to the President. A photostat copy of above, together with the
original answer by WASHINGTON is in the Archives of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania.

This address was read by Rev. Brother William Smith, one of the most
noted Episcopal preachers in Philadelphia, and the first Provost of the
College of Philadelphia, now the University of Pennsylvania. Brother
William Smith, D.D., had been an active member of the Masonic
Fraternity in Pennsylvania for forty years; he was the Chaplain of the
Grand Lodge of Moderns for almost a quarter of a century. In winter of
1778 he joined the Grand Lodge of Ancient York Masons, and for some time
served as Grand Secretary.[53]

Jonathan Bayard Smith, the Grand Master of Pennsylvania, was one of
Philadelphia's prominent citizens. During the Revolutionary period he
was an ardent patriot; he was among the earliest of those who espoused
the cause of independence. In 1775 he was chosen secretary of the
Committee of Safety, and in February, 1777, he was elected by the
assembly a delegate to the Continental Congress. He was a second time
chosen to this post, serving in the congresses of 1777-8. From April 4,
1777, till Nov. 13, 1778, he was prothonotary of the court of Common
Pleas.

On December 1, 1777, he presided at the public meeting, in Philadelphia,
of "Real Whigs," by whom it was resolved "That it be recommended to the
council of safety that in this great emergency ... every person between
the age of sixteen and fifty years be ordered out under arms." During
this year he was commissioned lieutenant-colonel of a battalion of
"Associators."


=J B SMITH

B. FEB. 21, 1742; D. JUNE 16, 1812.

GRAND MASTER OF MASONS IN PENNSYLVANIA, 1789-1794.=


In 1778 he was appointed a justice of the court of Common Pleas, Quarter
Sessions, and Orphans' Court, which post he held for many years. He
was appointed in 1781, one of the auditors of the accounts of
Pennsylvania troops in the service of the United States. In 1792, and
subsequently, he was chosen an alderman of the city, which was an office
of great dignity in his day, and in 1794 he was elected auditor-general
of Pennsylvania.

Brother Jonathan B. Smith was an active member of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania. He was the Senior Grand Warden in 1786, at the time when
the Provincial Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania: "_Resolved_, that the Grand
Lodge is, and ought to be perfectly independent and free of any such
foreign jurisdiction."[54]

In the two following years he was appointed Deputy Grand Master by Right
Worshipful Grand Master William Adcock; he was elected Right Worshipful
Grand Master in 1789 and served in that capacity for six years
(1789-1794). In the year 1798 he was again elected to that honorable
office, serving five more consecutive years (1798 to 1802), when he
declined reëlection. The following action was taken by the Grand
Lodge:[55]

     "On Motion made and Seconded the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania
     impressed with a grateful sense of the long assiduous and highly
     useful labours of their late R. W. Grand Master, Bror Jonathan
     Bayard Smith, Esqr, previous to and during his service in the
     high Station which he has left, Resolved Unanimously, That the most
     respectful Thanks of the said G. Lodge be presented to their said
     Brother Jonathan Bayard Smith for the eminent services he has
     rendered to the Craft generally and more especially for the able,
     diligent and impartial manner in which he has discharged the Duties
     of the Chair and while they deplore the necessity of his now
     retiring from the Official Station amongst them which he has so
     Honourably filled, they hope for a continuance of his Brotherly
     Love, Aid and information and finally that he be requested to
     receive the best wishes of the Grand Lodge for a prolongation of
     his useful life, a commensurate enjoyment of his Health and his
     final Happiness in the Mansion of Everlasting Rest."


Brother Joseph Few, Deputy Grand Master, was also a Revolutionary
Soldier, having served as Regimental Quarter Master with the 4th
Continental Artillery.

Brother Thomas Procter, Senior Grand Warden, formerly Colonel of the
Pennsylvania Artillery, and Warrant Master of the Military Lodge, No.
19, upon the Roster of Pennsylvania was prominent in both civil and
political affairs during WASHINGTON's administration. A full account of
Brother Thomas Procter and this Military Lodge will be found in the
History of the Old Masonic Lodges of Pennsylvania, published by the
Grand Lodge in 1913.[56]

For a sketch of Brother Peter Le Barbier Duplessis, the reader is
referred to the same volume.[57]


=WASHINGTON'S PAST MASTER'S JEWEL.

Replica in the Museum of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.=



Footnotes:

[49] Reprint of Minutes of Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, Vol. I, p. 178.

[50] _Ibid._, p. 180.

[51] MSS. Volume A, folio 17, 19, 21.

[52] Letter Book II, pp. 104-105.

[53] Cf. "Old Masonic Lodges of Pennsylvania," Vol. I, p. 201.

[54] Cf. Reprint of Minutes of Grand Lodge, Vol. I, p. 96 _et seq._

[55] _Ibid._, Vol. II, p. 68.

[56] Volume II, Chapter XXVI, pp. 1-36. Cf. also "Freemasonry in
Pennsylvania," Vol. I and II, for various references to Col. Procter.

[57] Cf. "Old Lodges," Vol. II, pp. 256 _et seq._